Are we on? Today's bench press day and
it's heavy bench press day. So, the goal
is 190 kg for three sets of three. And
before I start my benching, I'm doing
some thoracic mobility exercises that
I've used to do more of and I should
always kind of do some mobility work in
my training. Um, and I've just been a
little bit lazy, but I'm doing my best
to not be lazy. And I'm trying to do
this particular exercise for all of my
days. So, thoracic extension. So what
does thoracic mean? That's a part of
your spine. It's the vertebrae that are
attached to your ribs. Those are your
thoracic vertebrae. Above that are your
cervical vertebrae. So that's your neck.
And below that is your lumbar vertebrae
which is your lower back. And when
you're doing all pressing exercises, I
shouldn't just say pressing with all
exercises pretty much squatting,
deadlifting, everything. Thoracic
mobility and thoracic extension is a
really valuable position. And it's let's
keep it to bench press. Today I'm
arching in a bench press. You guys know
that's what I do for powerlifting. But
there's more benefits to arching in a
bench press beyond the obvious. So a lot
of people think powerlifterss they arch
in their bench press to reduce the range
of motion so they can lift more weight
in competition, which is absolutely
true, but it's not the only benefit of
arching in a bench press. So two more
benefits for arching in a bench press.
One of them is the shoulder blade
position when we put the barbell on our
chest. So think of it like a row. If you
were to do a seated cable row, when you
get to this position, you want your
shoulder blades to be kind of back and
down. So, that's the exact same position
I want when I'm when I have a barbell on
my chest, back and down. Now, here's the
difference between a bench press and a
row when we're talking about shoulder
positioning. When I row, I want my
shoulder blades to come forward here.
But when I bench, the problem with
coming forward with my shoulder blades
is I'm laying on a on the bench with a
heavy weight in my hands that restricts
my shoulder blades from being able to
move freely. So, if I allow my shoulder
blades to come forward or to protract
when I'm lifting a heavy weight, when I
want to bring that bar down on my chest,
like it's happening now, because my
shoulder blades are sitting on this this
foam roller here, it's going to stop my
shoulder blades from naturally
retracting, which is why I perform my
bench press from retraction from the the
whole range of motion. So one, yeah, of
course it reduces the range of motion,
but two, it positions your shoulder
blades in the safest position for
pressing heavy weights, which is
retracted in the press. So I spoke about
thoracic extension. Those two actions
are paired. Thoracic extension is
required for shoulder blades to come
back and down. If your if your upper
back is rounded or you know hunching
forward, you can't really pull your
shoulder blades back to the position
they need to be. So range of motion,
scapular positioning. But now let's talk
about the benefits of muscle building
and scapular positioning or I should say
thoracic spine positioning. Have you
ever heard of the Q chest up? Okay, so
that's not me picking up my chest.
Actually, it's thoracic extension is the
action that we're achieving now. So
that's that thoracic extension. What it
does is it increases my sternum angle.
So this is my sternum. Not just that
bony point there. That's the one part of
the sternum, but it goes all the way up
to here. So my pec fibers, majority of
my pec fibers attach to the sternal,
that's the sternal portion of the pecs.
So we've also got clavvicular portion of
the pecs as well. But majority of the
pec fibers attach to the sternum. And
when your goal is to build muscle, what
you want to do is create tension on the
muscle. And the best way to create
tension on the chest is so you think of
the attachment points, sternum and
humorous. So I want to pull the the
humorous back and pick the sternum up.
So, it's increasing the distance between
those attachment points, which increases
tension on the muscle. Which means even
if your goal is to build muscle, so not
just powerlifting, not just cheating
with an arch and um manipulating your
levers so that you can shift a heavy
load, but if your goal is to build
muscle, you want to pre-tension that
muscle so that you can use it maximally,
right? So that means that all of your
pressing exercises, even if your goal is
muscle building, so whether it's a an
incline, a flat, any of those angles,
arching your upper back is a very very
important thing for you to be able to
do. So a lot of people when they arch,
so now let that leads me to the next
problem with arching. A lot of people
don't have great thoracic mobility. And
when they arch, all they're doing is
arching their lower back. So when you do
a correct arch, yes, there will be arch
in the lower back, but I want it to
carry over to the upper back. If you
don't have the upper back mobility and
you're just copying in your lower back,
it's not really doing many great things.
So therefore, increasing your thoracic
mobility with exercises like this is
really beneficial. And I'm I'm going to
start doing this now. I've already
started on squat day, which was 2 days
ago. Um is doing it before all of my
training days. So check this out. What
am I doing? So I've set up this foam
roller so it's horizontal directly
underneath where my scapulas are. So
imagine you're a girl and you're wearing
a bra. Maybe you are a girl and you're
wearing a bra where that bra strap would
be. But typically it's directly. So if
those are your shoulder blades, this
needs to be placed directly underneath
your shoulder blades. And what I want to
do is extend my spine
past that. So this is thoracic
extension. Okay? And then I make that
adjustment. So this is mobility work.
It's different to stretching. So I'm
mobilizing joints rather than attempting
to elongate muscles. So if you need to
stretch, so people talk about pec
stretches cuz you're about to use that.
I don't recommend that. So stretching
what it does is it lengthens those
fibers and it it detaches those. So what
you want to do is be contracting those
muscle fibers. So this defeats the
purpose of it. So when you stretch
before maximal contracting, it actually
decreases the strength of that maximal
contraction. So don't stretch muscles
before you're about to use them. If your
goal is to use them maximally, right? So
I'm not going to stretch my pecs now.
And if you have to stretch your muscles,
do it after. But actually stretching,
there's not a huge amount of benefits to
stretching, especially not before you
train or not before strength work,
especially on the target muscles you're
about to strengthen. But that's the
difference between stretching, so that's
elongating muscles, which I'm not doing,
and mobilizing joints. So mobilizing
joints, huge benefits, that's going to
allow me to achieve the right position
that I need in a bench press, which I'm
going to walk you through in a moment.
So today's session is going to be it's
my heavy day. So last week, if you're
following, I did 3x3 on 185 and it was
pretty comfortable. Today's plan is 3x3
on 190. Uh hopefully it's equally as
comfortable. I've got Musty here who's
going to be on the unrackck. Have you
been practicing Musty, bro? You ready
for me?
All right, we'll do that. So, while I'm
going to be warming up my bench press,
you're going to be warming up your
unrackcking. But I'm going to do my
usual dumbbell pressing up to my first
weight. So, what am I doing? 190. So,
what's that plate configuration? It's
going to be red and then three blues
aside and the goal. So this is week two
of the program. Week one was 185. Week
two is 190. Next week will be 195.
That'll be pretty big. And then the
fourth week which is the goal is to hit
a new kind of like PB around this range.
I've done it before but not for a long
time. Watch your step is 200 kg for
three. So recently I did 200 kg for two
and then I retested my max and it was
210 for one. So the next step would be
200 for three which should bring my max
to I don't know maybe 215 who knows
something like that. So this is just
warm-ups. I'm not going to be a lot of
the times with my programming I'll pair
push with pull. So that's agonist
antagonist supersets but when I'm doing
a bench press this heavy 190 kg I need
all the energy that I can get. So I'm
just going to do bench press and then
I'm going to wait 8 minutes without
doing a superset. So the only benefit of
doing a superset is time saving. So when
I'm not doing a superset, that means I'm
not saving time. That means my session
is going to last maybe two hours if I do
all the accessories. So 3x3 of a heavy
weight like 190. I'll probably be
finished that in 1 hour. Watch out.
See, I'm I'm extending my thoracic
spine. I'm not just laying flat and
relaxing. I'm picking my sternum angle
up or chest up.
And if my goal was muscle hypertrophy or
building pecs, this is the exact
position that I'd be in. I'd be poking
my chest up
on a flat and on an incline.
[Applause]
Lovely.
All right.
So, let's talk
about the other things that are going on
in my life. Not really my life, just my
shoulder. So, last week I did a session
with the cream team. So, that was uh so
that was on the weekend with Reese and
Vasa. And so, I'm doing high rep work
and then low rep work. So, I did three
sets of eight on 160
and I'm doing three by three on on this
heavy day. And I find that I can't go
heavy every session. I need to do a
heavy session and a light session. And
that's going to give my body the most
time to recover. That's for me and most
people that I work with and probably you
as well. But something happened on my
first set of uh 160 when we unracked it.
It wasn't anything problem with the
unrackckrack, but something happened in
my shoulder just went oh it's like a
sharp pain and it kind of it felt sore.
I don't know if it's that or a
combination of that with my boxing cuz a
lot of I box two times a week and that's
kind of been hurting a little bit but it
was just on that top set. The first top
set it hurt. I still did the set of
eight and it was pretty easy. Uh and
then on the next set I was just really
really cautious with the unrackck. So we
kind of we slowed it down and I really
focused on the position and there was
zero pain at all. So, I felt it again um
when I was doing the dumbbells just now.
So, right now I thought I'm going to
continue. And this is what I'll always
do. If there's no pain doing the
exercise, like I don't just stop because
there's a little bit of pain. I say,
"Well, let's just see what happens with
the exercise." So, sometimes I've hurt
my back and then I've had successful
deadlift sessions because it's like it
just makes me mindful of how to brace
correctly and how to move correctly and
it actually ends up being beneficial.
So, that's what I'm going to be doing
today. um is making sure that I'm
positioning my body correctly. I'm going
to be really focused on the technique.
Uh and I've got my boy Must unrackcking
from the very very light weight. So, so
far I've only done 70 kg then 90. But
both of those sets, zero discomfort. So,
that's what I'm going to be doing for
this entire session. It's going to be a
little bit boring. So, we'll just fast
forward through and you'll see set, set,
set, set. And then once I've done my my
top set, that's when I'll get into more
discussion about everything that we're
doing. But right now, um, and that
brings me on to my next point. I'm going
to say it again. I'm going to get my
game face on and I'm going to get the
work done. Now, someone actually put out
in the comment on one of my last bench
press videos. They said, um, you
mentioned game face. What does that
actually mean for you? You know, getting
the right mindset for your heavy
sessions. What does that mean for you?
Um, yeah, great question. That's evolved
for me. Um, in my years of training,
when I first started lifting heavy, I
used to think, uh, you know, maximum
arousal before the big sets is going to
allow you to perform better. To a
degree, that's true. To a degree, that's
actually detrimental to your
performance. So, sometimes there's a
point where you can be hyperaroused. So,
too much psychup, the big back slaps,
and all of those things can um, you
know, it can negatively impact your
performance. Uh, and I've found that
over the years, that's not what I
respond best to. So if you slap my back
before a big set, I don't perform
better. It's kind of a bit of a
distraction. It's like kind of get off
me, right? So for me, it's more about
focus. I know how to focus. And a lot of
the times when I'm doing my big heavy
sets, I don't like to be having
conversations, especially that are
unrelated to my training, right? So um
whenever I'm doing uh education,
whenever I'm teaching people how to lift
and I'm training, I won't do that on my
big heavy sessions because it takes my
focus off, you know, the heavy sets. I
really need to be focused to make sure
nothing goes wrong and make sure that um
you know my mind's where it needs to be.
So typically I don't do that for these
lighter warm-up sets. I like to be
relaxed because it's actually draining
to be too hyperfocused for the entire
session. But at the same time um I need
to have my mind on this task because
I've got a potential shoulder injury um
if something goes wrong cuz it's 190 kg.
So these are the times where if you're
just out by a little bit something can
go wrong, right? So, I don't want that
to happen. So, back to the point. I've
got my game face on. Um, I'm going to be
really focused on technique, locking my
shoulders in position. So, really
arching my upper back, shoulders back
and down. And really, this is where I
need my spotter as well to really help
guide me out and take a lot of that
weight for the unrackck so I'm not out
of position. Um, and that's what we're
going to do. So, 90 kil, sorry, 110 kg
is next. And we're going to go up by 10
kg jumps. Sorry, 10 on each side. So,
20. So, up until I get to 190 kg. And
that's it. Wish me luck. Let's do it,
Musty. Okay. Ready, bro?
[Applause]
Go on.
Come on.
[Music]
Perfect. Perfect.
That was comfortable.
I'm still guarded. You can see whenever
I'm guarded because I'm very slow on the
way down. Um, but then
it's the way up that counts, right? So,
what I'm doing on the way down is I'm
just trying to maximize tension
and precision. So, I get it in the line.
Get it in the line. Get in the line.
Yep, we're on. No problem. So hopefully
that's what happens with the next set,
which is my first top set. 190. Here we
come. Do you think we need to adjust the
program? I'm going to reassess set by
set. That's what I'm going to do
because, you know, I'd like to do 3x3,
but I would also like to come out
uninjured. Do you know what I'm saying?
So what's the priority? I'll tell you
what the priority is to stay uninjured.
So sometimes it does mean taking a small
step backwards so that you can continue
moving forward rather than being forced
to take a big step backwards which is
not what we want.
Come on.
[Applause]
The stress,
the stress, let me tell you,
man. Thank you, Must Thank you, bro. All
right, I'll tell you why I'm so happy.
Not because I got three reps on 190. Of
course, that's okay. We knew I could do
that, but because that didn't hurt my
shoulder at all. But I'm going to quit
while I'm ahead because that's too much
stress. I know that I can do multiple
sets of that. And yeah, you know, it'd
be nice to follow the program and do
3x3, which I haven't looked back on the
video, but I felt that that was
comfortable. I know I had a fourth rep
there for sure. Um, so my strength is
there. But what I'm going to do now is
just a bunch of shoulder health work so
that this pain doesn't bother me
anymore. So, for me to work towards my
ultimate goal, which is to do 220 kg,
which I'm not far off. I did 210 last
week, or was it the week before,
whatever it was. Um, and yeah, so 220 is
not far off. For me to do 220 from here,
I need to not injure myself. So, that's
the best way of not injuring yourself is
don't take big risks because when I'm at
heavy weights like this, you know, the
smallest thing that could go wrong can
can cause an injury that puts me out for
a long time, which I don't want to do.
It doesn't mean don't train. It does not
mean don't train. So, right now I'm
going to I'm not going to um change the
program. So, next week hopefully I'm
back to my 3x3. Hopefully, it's just a
thing of the past. But right now, one
top set of three and 190. And now I'm
just going to do um other exercises, the
dumbbell work, cuz there was very little
stability in the dumbbells that
aggravated it. So, maybe I won't be
doing dumbbell stuff. I'm going to play
around and see what I can do. I know I
can do my posing muscles. So, all of my
rows and pull downs. I'm going to do a
whole bunch of that right now. And
that's it. I'm happy. No injury. Good
work.
I know. I could see your face when
you're unwracking, bro. You should see,
bro. I wish I had the recorder looking
at your face. You were I've never seen a
game face like that, bro. I think you
were more nervous than me. Imagine that.
Imagine that. Um, anyway. Nah. Good.
Thank you for taking it seriously, man.
This is important, bro. This is
important. Congratulations. That was
very Thank you. Thank you. Fourth. Yeah,
but like I was even like not banging it.
I was just like guiding it. Guiding it.
For sure. There was a fourth. M. Good
one. Good one. You know what I might do?
I might see about doing a back down set.
That's what I might do. That's what I
will be comfortable doing. So, we'll
consider what that back down set is
going to look like.
I might even do one more set of that.
Good one. Bench pressing done. That's
definitely plenty of stimulus to make
sure I move forward. So, I thought that,
you know, instead of doing 3x3, I
thought I'll do one by three, count my
lucky stars, walk away. And then it's
like, is that enough stimulus to move
forward? Like, this is the game that I
always play in my mind. Probably is, but
you know, that's what plays on my mind.
It's like, ah, is it enough volume to be
moving forward? Well, now I definitely
have done enough volume. It's different
stimulus, you know, sets of 12. I wasn't
aiming for sets of 12. It' probably be
better for strength if it was a heavier
weight and less reps, but that's exactly
what I'm avoiding to protect my
shoulder. I know that the risk of injury
on that lighter weight for me is very
low. So, that's my highest priority is
just staying injuryfree, but also giving
myself enough stimulus for the session
to be able to, you know, move strong,
move forward for next week. So, all of
the pushing is done. Next up, whole
bunch of rows and pull downs and
shoulder health exercises and some
freaking rest. Check the technique here.
This is only warming up, right? But a
common question that I get is, you know,
do you go all the way down like Arnold
Schwarzenegger style, which is what he
does in pumping iron, or do you stay
rigid?
I believe it's kind of somewhere in
between. I don't want to. This swing is
kind of just momentum. That's not my
upper back. But at the same time, I
don't mind
thoracic flexion. So again with the
thoracic spine. So remember that's all
of the vertebra that's attached to ribs.
So kind of from here to to here, that
part of my back, I want to allow it to
come into a little bit of flexion
because what happens when it goes into
So flexion means rounding and extension
means this way. So, when you let it
round forward a little bit, I'm still
holding my lower back
rigid, but I'm allowing my upper back to
round forward a little bit. And what
that does, that's going to allow my
scapula, my shoulder blades to protract
a little bit further. If I stay rigid in
my upper back, my scapulas won't
protract as much. It's not that much of
a big deal, but that means the muscles
that are attached to the scapula, which
are the midback muscles, which is the
rhomboids and trapezius, don't get to
lengthen through their full stretch. So,
when it comes to strength training, I
want to strengthen each muscle through
its full range. The most lengthened to
the most contracted.
I'm not saying that shorter ranges don't
work. Of course, they do. But when it
comes to especially rehab and joint
health, I want every range of motion to
be strong. So, so therefore, my
recommendation is maintain rigidity at
the lower back, but allow for some
rounding at the upper back just so that
we can get a greater stretch on those
midback muscles because if I've got my
chest up in that bottom position, my
midback muscles or my scapula won't be
able to protract as far. So, that's my
recommendation. Let's have a look again
in real time. Okay.
So, rigid lower back, upper back
rounding, and then extension of the
upper back. Upper back rounding so that
I can protract my scapula and stretch my
midback muscles and then extend my
thoracic spine so that I can fully
retract my scapula. Protraction,
retraction. So, this is scapula
position. Scapula is protracted. Scapula
is retracted. Now, spine position,
flexed, extended, flexed, extended. And
that allows me to train my midback
muscles by squeezing my shoulder blades
together.
And that's how I perform my seated cable
row.
Yeah, I'm taking it to a stretch. So,
it's not that it's loose. There's
tension always on the muscle. I don't
just drop and relax. I'm I'm actively
stretching. I'm actively stretching it
and
and then I I never I try and never
actually go loose at any part of the
movement
for for any of my exercises. So, it's
maintaining tension from start to
finish, especially in my core. It's it's
looser at the upper back, but I'm still
bracing my core here. The next muscle
that we want to think about is the lats.
So, when we do a row, this is one of the
biggest differences with the grip
position. So, I like a neutral grip.
That kind of positions my shoulders in
the most comfortable position. That's
why it's called neutral, right? So, the
alternatives to that is pronated,
supernated. So, what's the difference
here? Supernated allows me to use more
bicep. When I pronate, that relaxes the
bicep a little bit. So, it's kind of a
difference in elbow flexes, but then the
width of the row handle. So, when we go
closer, it's going to force the elbows
to tuck in more, which means that's
called shoulder joint extension. And
then if we go wider, wider, wider,
wider. So what that does is it brings it
more into horizontal abduction. Right?
So here's the difference. The the
further up my elbows go, the less lats
we use, right? So if you want to take
the lats out of the equation, you want
to abduct the humorris to 90°. So what's
an exercise that we do with that? Well,
that's the face pull. Check this out. So
the objective of a face pull is people
do it as a rehab exercise or to target
midback, but the objective is flare the
elbows so that we take the lats out of
the equation to place more emphasis on
the midback muscles and the rear delts.
So this is no lats. Now I'm got now I've
got lats involved. So when I bring my
tuck my elbows in and involve my lats,
I'm a lot stronger. So this is lats and
then I go less lats, less lats, less
lats up to 90°. No lats, no lats. And
that's just pure midback. Same principle
applies with the rows. If you do, and
I've done these sometimes and I quite
like it, a wide grip row and you pull it
high on your sternum, all we're doing is
taking the lats out of the equation and
emphasizing the midback muscles and the
rear delts. And that's your seated cable
row. But once again, you know, when I'm
doing it, the goal is for me, I'm a
strength athlete. I'm not a hypertrophy
athlete. I'm not a bodybuilder. So, I'm
not trying to build any muscle, you
know, isolate any muscle in particular.
I want my whole upper back muscles to be
strong. I want my lats to be strong. I
want my midback muscles to be strong.
So, in my opinion, the the neutral
position is where we get an even blend.
So, you know, above the belly button,
below the sternum, elbows, you know,
roughly 45° full stretch of the midback
muscles by protracting the scapula and
retracting the scapula. This is where we
get the perfect blend of lats, traps,
romboids, and rear delts. Rep range for
that, I like more than 12. So, 12 to 15,
even up to 20. But, you know, when I do
less than 12 reps, I just don't find it
hits the muscles, right? It's one of
those exercises that you just feel
better stimulation when you're doing a
higher rep range. So, 12 to 15 reps for
the lat for the seated cable row. And
I'll be doing I'll go heavier and
heavier and I'll just do two more sets.
That'll be one set. So, I'll do two more
sets of that before I do some more
shoulder health exercises.
Okay, that's me. I've got one more set,
but that was actually a good session.
I'm happy with today. Um, I hope you
enjoyed the session. I'm going to see
you guys next time. YouTube thinks that
you should see this video next. In the
meantime, subscribe if you haven't
already. Click like, comment what you
want to see next time, and I'll see you
then. Take care, guys.